>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 26:
A DRAFT PLAN TO REPLACE THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT MAKES ITS
WAY THROUGH WASHINGTON, D.C.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
THE DAKOTA ACCESS PIPELINE.
A LOOK AT THE FACTORS THAT LED
TO MONTHS OF PROTEST.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
WITH PRESIDENT TRUMP'S FIRST
FORMAL ADDRESS TO CONGRESS TWO
DAYS AWAY, AN ANALYSIS OF THE
DRAFT REPUBLICAN CONGRESSIONAL
PLAN TO REPLACE THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT, ALSO KNOWN AS
OBAMACARE, FINDS IT WOULD
SIGNIFICANTLY REDUCE THE NUMBER
OF AMERICANS WITH HEALTH
COVERAGE AND COST THE STATES
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS MORE THAN
THEY'RE ALREADY SPENDING.
A 36-PAGE ANALYSIS OF THE PLAN
WAS SHOWN AT THE NATIONAL
GOVERNOR'S ASSOCIATION
CONFERENCE THIS WEEKEND, AND
OBTAINED BY "THE WASHINGTON
POST" AND THE NEWS SITE "VOX."
THE ANALYSIS BY RESEARCH FIRM
AVALERE HEALTH AND THE
CONSULTING FIRM McKINSEY AND
COMPANY SAYS THE PLAN WOULD:
TODAY, A WHITE HOUSE SPOKESWOMAN
SAID ONE GOAL IS FOR NO ONE TO
LOSE COVERAGE.
>> WE HAVE TO MAKE BIG CHANGES.
I THINK BOTH REPUBLICANS AND
DEMOCRATS AGREE WITH THAT.
THIS IS A PROGRAM THAT WAS
SHOVED THROUGH WITH SO MANY
PROBLEM, AND WE'RE STILL EVERY
DAY FINDING OUT NEW PROBLEMS TO
THIS PROGRAM.
WE KNOW THAT WE CAN'T JUST
REPEAL IT AND NOT DO ANYTHING
ELSE. WE HAVE TO REPEAL IT AND
WE HAVE TO REPLACE IT WITH
SOMETHING BETTER.
>> Sreenivasan: THE DEMOCRATIC
LEADER IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, NANCY PELOSI,
SAYS SHE'S SKEPTICAL THE TRUMP
PLAN WILL IMPROVE ACCESS OR
BENEFITS.
>> WHAT THEY HAVE PUT FORTH AND
OUTLINED WILL COST MORE TO
CONSUMERS, IT WILL COVER FEWER
PEOPLE, IT WILL GIVE TAX BREAKS
TO THE WEALTHIEST PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY,
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR SCOTT WALKER
SAID BLOCK GRANTS CAN ADEQUATELY
COVER PEOPLE IN POVERTY, AS HE
DID IN WISCONSIN.
>> WE HAVE UNDER OUR PLAN, WE
HAVE ONE OF THE LOWEST RATES OF
UNINSURED, IN FACT, ONE OF THE
HIGHEST RATES OF OVERALL INSURED
IN THE NATION, BECAUSE WE USED
REFORMS TO GET PEOPLE INTO THE
MARKETPLACE AND TO MAKE THINGS
WORK THERE.
I THINK THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT WE
WANT AS A NATION.
>> Sreenivasan: THE DEMOCRATIC
GOVERNOR OF VIRGINIA , TERRY
MCAULIFFE, SAID TODAY HE OPPOSES
ANY DECREASE IN FEDERAL FUNDS TO
PROVIDE COVERAGE.
>> WE DON'T LIKE BLOCK GRANTS.
IF BLOCK GRANT US, WE'RE GONNA
HAVE A SET NUMBER.
AND WHAT HAPPENS IF WE HAVE A
RECESSION?
WHAT IF THE STOCK MARKET GOES
DOWN?
WE AT THE STATE LEVEL HAVE TO
INCUR THOSE COSTS.
>> Sreenivasan: NEWLY ELECTED
DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE
CHAIRMAN TOM PEREZ SAYS HIS
PARTY WILL REBUILD FROM THE
SCHOOL BOARD TO THE U.S. SENATE.
OUTNUMBERED IN THE SENATE, HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES, GOVERNORS
MANSIONS, AND STATE
LEGISLATURES, PEREZ SAID TODAY
THE DEMOCRATS WILL INVEST MORE
IN STATE PARTIES.
>> WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE WE HAVE
AN EVERY-ZIP-CODE STRATEGY.
THAT'S HOW WE WIN.
THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT WE'RE GOING
TO DO.
THESE INVESTMENTS IN GRASSROOTS
ORGANIZING, BECAUSE OUR VALUES
ARE THE RIGHT VALUES, BUT WE'VE
GOT TO PUT THOSE VALUES INTO
ACTION.
>> Sreenivasan: PEREZ IS THE
FIRST LATINO TO CHAIR THE
DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE.
IN RUSSIA AND UKRAINE TODAY,
THERE WERE LARGE PROTESTS
AGAINST RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN.
IN MOSCOW, THOUSANDS
COMMEMORATED OPPOSITION LEADER
BORIS NEMTSOV, WHO WAS SHOT TO
DEATH ON A BRIDGE NEAR THE
KREMLIN TWO YEARS AGO TOMORROW.
NEMSTOV, A FORMER DEPUTY PRIME
MINISTER, WAS A STAUNCH CRITIC
OF PUTIN, AND MANY MARCHERS
CARRIED ANTI-PUTIN POSTERS.
FIVE CHECHEN MEN ARE BEING HELD
IN NEMTSOV'S MURDER, BUT THEY
DENY THE CHARGES.
NEMSTOV'S FAMILY SAYS THE
INVESTIGATION HAS NOT UNCOVERED
WHO ORDERED THE KILLING.
IN KIEV, A MARCH PROTESTED
RUSSIA'S ANNEXATION OF THE
CRIMEAN PENINSULA THREE YEARS
AGO.
THE MARCH ALSO COMMEMORATED
THOSE KILLED OR ARRESTED DURING
THE 2014 UPRISING THAT PRECEDED
THE ANNEXATION AND DROVE
UKRAINE'S RUSSIA-FRIENDLY
PRESIDENT FROM POWER.
IRAN'S FORMER HARD LINE
PRESIDENT, MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD,
HAS WRITTEN A LETTER TO
PRESIDENT TRUMP CRITICIZING THE
UNITED STATES.
IN THE LENGTHY MISSIVE PUBLISHED
TODAY BY IRANIAN MEDIA,
AHMADINEJAD TOLD MISTER TRUMP HE
WON THE ELECTION, BECAUSE HE,"
TRUTHFULLY DESCRIBED THE U.S.
POLITICAL SYSTEM AND ELECTORAL
STRUCTURE AS CORRUPT.
ALLUDING TO THE U.S.
ADMINISTRATION'S TRAVEL BAN ON
CITIZENS FROM SEVEN
PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM COUNTRIES,
INCLUDING IRAN, AHMADINEJAD SAID
THE U.S. SHOULD, "VALUE RESPECT
TOWARD THE DIVERSITY OF NATIONS
AND RACES.
AHMADINEJAD GAVE THE LETTER TO
THE SWISS EMBASSY IN TEHRAN,
WHICH REPRESENTS AMERICAN
INTERESTS THERE.
POLICE IN SWEDEN ARE
INVESTIGATING THE CAUSE OF A
LAST NIGHT'S FIRE AT ONE OF
COUNTRY'S LARGEST MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEE SHELTERS.
IT OCCURRED IN SOUTHWESTERN
SWEDEN AT A SHELTER HOUSING MORE
THAN 150 MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES.
AT LEAST 15 PEOPLE WERE TREATED
FOR SMOKE INHALATION, AND TWO
FOR INJURIES AFTER JUMPING FROM
WINDOWS TO ESCAPE.
THERE WERE 112 FIRES AT SWEDISH
REFUGEE CENTERS LAST YEAR,
ACCORDING TO THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS, AND MOST OF THEM WERE
CAUSED BY ARSON.
ONE SWEDISH NEWSPAPER COUNTS 18
ARSON AND OTHER ATTACKS ON
REFUGEE CENTERS JUST IN THE PAST
WEEK.
IN THE PAST TWO YEARS, SWEDEN
HAS TAKEN IN THE MOST REFUGEES
PER CAPITA OF ANY EUROPEAN
NATION.
IT IS NOW THE FOURTH MONTH THAT
THE IRAQI ARMY HAS BEEN WORKING
TO DRIVE ISIS OUT OF MOSUL, THE
COUNTRY'S SECOND LARGEST CITY.
IRAQ'S AIR FORCE HAS CARRIED OUT
ITS FIRST-EVER STRIKES ON ISIS
POSITIONS INSIDE IN NEIGHBORING
SYRIA."
WALL STREET JOURNAL" REPORTER
BEN KESSLING IS COVERING THE
CONFLICT AND JOINS ME NOW BY
SKYPE FROM IRBIL.
BEN WE'RE CATCHING UP WITH YOU
PARTLY BECAUSE OFTENTIMES THE
NEWS ABOUT THE FIGHT IN IRAQ
GETS BURIED ABOUT THE THINGS
THAT ARE HAPPENING IN
WASHINGTON.
WHAT'S BEEN HAPPENING THE LAST
FEW WEEKS?
>> THE MOST IMPORTANT THING IS
OVER THE WEEKEND, THE IRAQI
GROUND FORCES LAUNCHED AN
OFFENSIVE ON MOSUL.
THE EAST SIDE WAS TAKEN BY
ISLAMIC STATE BY IRAQI FORCES.
IN A CAMPAIGN THAT BEGAN
OCTOBER.
NOW THAT CAMPAIGN HAS RESUMED ON
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE TIGRIS
RIVER, ON THE WEST SIDE OF
MOSUL.
WEST SIDE OF MOSUL IS FILLED
WITH OLD NEIGHBORHOODS, TWISTED,
DENSE, IT'S SUPPOSED TO BE VERY
DIFFICULT FOR THE IRAQI MILITARY
AN THEY ARE FACING THAT NOW.
BUT OVER THE WEEKEND THAT...
WEEKEND THAT OFFENSIVE WAS LOST.
IN THE PAST FEW DAYS THEY HAVE
PUSHED THROUGH TAKEN THE AIRPORT
IN THE CITY AND STARTED MOVING
NORTH INTO SOME OF THESE DENSE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF YOUR
RECENT STORIES TALKED ABOUT THE
DRONES, NOT PREDATOR ARE DRONES
BUT WHAT YOU MIGHT SEE IN THE
MALLS THE QUAD-COPTER ONES.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THE ISLAMIC STATE HAS MODIFIED
THEIR DRONE TECHNOLOGY, MONTHS
AGO, WHEN YOU GOT TO THE
BATTLEFIELD YOU WOULD SEE SOME
OF THESE DRONES THAT WOULD BE
SHOT TOWN, AND THEY LOOKED LIKE
CRUDE MODEL AIRPLANES IN SOME
CASES.
BUT OVER TIME, USING QUAD COPTER
TYPE DRONES, THE KIND YOU CAN GO
DOWN TO THE MALL AND PICK UP,
THEY'VE RETROFITTED THESE THINGS
WITH SOME SORT OF RELIEF
MECHANISM AND NOW THEY ARE
FLYING OVER IRAQI POSITION HE
BOTH IRAQI MILITARY AND
CIVILIANS IN SOME CASES AND
DROPPING CONVENTIONAL GRENADES
WHICH TET NECESSITATE ON IMPACT.
-- WHICH DETONATE ON IMPACT.
THE IRAQI MILITARY AND CIVILIANS
HAVE SAID THIS IS NOT GOING TO
PREVENT THE RETAKING OF MOSUL
BUT IT IS CAUSING TET IT IS
CAUSING INJURIES AND IT IS
WORRISOME FOR THE IRAQI GROUND
TROOPS AND FOR CIVILIANS IN THE
CITY WHO HAVE TO DEAL WITH THIS
THREAT.
>> Sreenivasan: TELL US A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THAT.
HOW MANY CIVILIANS ARE STILL
STUCK IN THAT PART OF THE CITY?
>> IT IS UNCLEAR.
THERE IS NO GREAT ESTIMATE ON
THE NUMBER OF CIVILIANS.
BUT IT'S BE LIKELY THAT THERE
ARE -- IT IS LIKELY THAT THERE
ARE STILL HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE.
JUST ORE THE -- OVER THE PAST
COUPLE OF DAYS THERE HAVE BEEN
MORE THAN 3,000 PEOPLE WHO HAVE
PUSHED OUT OF THE CITY, 30,000
CIVILIANS, ACCORDING TO A NEW
COUNT THAT CAME OUT ON SUNDAY
FROM IRAQI OFFICIALS.
AND THE U.N. AND OTHER AID
ORGANIZATIONS ARE EXPECTING TO
SEE A NUMBER OF MORE CIVILIANS
THAT ARE BEING PUSHED OUT AS
DISPLACED PERSONS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, BEN
KESLING OF THE WALL STREET
JOURNAL, JOINING US VIA SKYPE
FROM IRBIL THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: THE
CONTROVERSIAL DAKOTA ACCESS
PIPELINE IS DESIGNED TO CARRY
NORTH DAKOTA OIL THROUGH THE
DAKOTAS AND IOWA TO AN EXISTING
PIPELINE IN ILLINOIS.
FOLLOWING MONTHS OF PROTESTS,
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION STOPPED
THE PROJECT, BUT PRESIDENT TRUMP
HAS PUT IT BACK ON TRACK.
THE PUBLIC MEDIA COLLABORATION"
INSIDE ENERGY," IN PARTNERSHIP
WITH ROCKY MOUNTAIN PUBLIC
MEDIA, HAS PRODUCED A
DOCUMENTARY CALLED "BEYOND
STANDING ROCK," ABOUT WHAT LED
TO THE PROTESTS AND PRESIDENTIAL
ACTIONS.
REPORTER LEIGH PATERSON HAS THIS
EXCERPT FROM THE DOCUMENTARY.
>> IT IS OUR DUTY TO FIGHT FOR
OUR FREEDOM!
IT IS OUR DUTY TO WIN!
>> Reporter: THE PROTESTERS CAME
FROM ALL OVER THE COUNTRY TO
FIGHT THE DAKOTA ACCESS
PIPELINE.
FOR MANY THIS IS A FIGHT OVER
CLEAN WATER.
FOR OTHERS IT'S A FIGHT AGAINST
BIG OIL AND CLIMATE CHANGE.
FOR THE STANDING ROCK SIOUX IT'S
A FIGHT FOR CONTROL.
>> TRIBES ARE FLEXING THEIR
MUSCLE.
THEY ARE SOVEREIGN NATIONS AND
THEY HAVE THE ABILITY TO GET
ENGAGED.
>> Reporter: MISINFORMATION,
EMOTION, AND CONFUSION
SURROUNDED THESE PROTESTS.
MORE THAN 600 PROTESTERS HAVE
BEEN ARRESTED.
>> IT'S KIND OF TURNED
UNFORTUNATELY INTO KIND OF A
SMALL TRULY PEACEFUL PROTEST,
NATIVE AMERICAN MOVEMENT, INTO A
BIG WHITE HIPPIE BURNING MAN ON
THE PLAINS OF NORTH DAKOTA IN
THE MIDDLE OF WINTER.
>> SOMETIMES PEOPLE JUST SAY,
LIKE, THEY'RE OPPOSED TO
PIPELINE DEVELOPMENT, AND
THEY'RE OPPOSED TO PIPELINES.
WELL, THAT'S FINE, AND THEY'RE
ENTITLED TO THEIR OPINION, BUT
PIPELINE DEVELOPMENT IS LEGALLY
PERMISSIBLE IN NORTH DAKOTA, AND
WE'RE OBLIGATED TO ENFORCE THE
LAWS.
SO WHEN A COMPANY MEETS THE
CONDITIONS SET BY LAW FOR A
PERMIT, THEY RECEIVE ONE.
>> Reporter: THE STANDOFF HERE
WAS BROUGHT ON BY A CONVERGENCE
OF ISSUES: TRIBAL SOVEREIGNTY,
ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE,
ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIVISM, AND
FEDERAL LAW.
>> WE'RE A SOVEREIGN NATION, AND
WE'RE PUTTING OUR FOOT DOWN, AND
YOU CAN'T DO THIS TO US ANYMORE.
IN THE PAST THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT STEAM ROLLED THROUGH
US AND DID EVERYTHING THAT THEY
WANTED TO DO WITHOUT GIVING US
AN OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE ANY
CONSENT OR CONSULTATION.
>> Reporter: THE DAKOTA ACCESS
PIPELINE STRETCHES FOR NEARLY
1,200 MILES, COMPLETELY BURIED
UNDERGROUND.
THE DALLAS-BASED PIPELINE
COMPANY, ENERGY TRANSFER
PARTNERS, SAYS IT'S A NEARLY $4
BILLION DOLLAR PROJECT.
THE COMPANY DECLINED INSIDE
ENERGY'S REQUEST TO BE
INTERVIEWED.
BUT IT HAS ARGUED THAT THE
PIPELINE IS THE BEST WAY TO MOVE
CRUDE OIL FROM THE BAKKEN REGION
OF NORTH DAKOTA TO MARKET.
LAST MONTH, ENERGY TRANSFER
PARTNERS POSTED THIS VIDEO ON
YOUTUBE EXPLAINING THE PROJECT'S
MERITS.
>> PIPELINES ARE THE SAFEST,
ENVIRONMENTALLY CLEANEST, AND
LEAST EXPENSIVE WAY TO TRANSPORT
THE FUEL THAT OUR COMMUNITIES
NEED.
>> WE CAN LOOK AT THIS PIPELINE
AND SAY THAT IT PUTS OUR WATER
AT RISK.
WE COULD ALSO TAKE A LOOK AT
WHAT IT ALSO PUTS AT RISK.
IT PUTS OUR SACRED SITES AT
RISK.
>> Reporter: THE CONTROVERSY HAS
CENTERED ON THE ONLY INCOMPLETE
SECTION OF THE PIPELINE.
ENERGY TRANSFER PARTNERS SAYS
THERE IS 1,094 FEET LEFT TO
BUILD.
A STRETCH THAT'S AROUND THREE
FOOTBALL FIELDS LONG THAT
CROSSES UNDER THE MISSOURI
RIVER, JUST NORTH OF THE
RESERVATION.
>> IT'S NOT IF IT WILL BREAK,
IT'S A MATTER OF WHEN IT WILL
BREAK AND WHERE IT'S GONNA BREAK
AND IF IT BREAKS UNDER THIS
RIVER, IT PUTS US AT RISK.
>> I WOULD COUNTER THAT THE
PIPELINE SAFETY RECORD IN THIS
COUNTRY FOR CRUDE OIL PIPELINES
IS INCREDIBLY STRONG.
>> Reporter: THE U.S. PRODUCES
BILLIONS OF BARRELS OF CRUDE OIL
A YEAR.
MUCH OF IT TRAVELS THROUGH A
VAST PIPELINE NETWORK THAT'S
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF MILES LONG.
>> WE'VE HAD VERY FEW ISSUES
WITH NATURAL GAS, CRUDE OIL, AND
OTHER KINDS OF PIPELINE
INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE UNITED
STATES.
IT IS A VERY HIGH RISK, LOW
PROBABILITY SCENARIO IN THIS
COUNTRY FOR A PIPELINE FAILING,
SO YOU'VE GOT TO PUT THAT ON THE
TABLE.
>> Reporter: NEARLY ALL OF THE
OIL MOVED BY PIPELINE ARRIVES AT
ITS DESTINATION SAFELY.
BUT IT'S THE FRACTION OF A
PERCENT THAT'S SPILLED THAT CAN
HAVE DEVASTATING EFFECTS.
>> I'M A NORTH DAKOTA CITIZEN.
I DON'T WANT THESE PIPELINES
SPILLING INTO OUR WATERS AND ON
OUR LAND AND RUINING OUR
BEAUTIFUL LANDSCAPE IN NORTH
DAKOTA EITHER.
>> Reporter: BEGINNING IN THE
SPRING OF 2015, THE NORTH DAKOTA
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION HELD
THREE PUBLIC HEARINGS ON THE
DAKOTA ACCESS PIPELINE ROUTE.
NONE OF THOSE HEARINGS WERE ON
THE STANDING ROCK RESERVATION,
BECAUSE THE PIPELINE WOULDN'T
ACTUALLY CROSS IT.
>> SO I HAD NO IDEA THAT THIS
WAS A CONCERN TO THE STANDING
ROCK MEMBERS OR THE TRIBAL
COUNCIL AT ALL.
>> Reporter: THE STATE IS NOT
THE ONLY PARTY THAT HAD TO SIGN
OFF ON THE PIPELINE.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, IN THIS
CASE, THE ARMY CORPS OF
ENGINEERS WAS ALSO CHARGED WITH
PERMITTING CERTAIN SECTIONS AND
CONSULTING WITH THE TRIBE.
>> CONSULTATION, AS WE
UNDERSTAND IT IN FEDERAL LAW,
DOESN'T SAY TRIBES CAN BLOCK
EVERY PROJECT.
WHAT IT SAYS IS THAT THEY HAVE A
SEAT AT THE TABLE AS A
GOVERNMENT TO EXPRESS A POINT OF
VIEW AND THAT YOU CAN'T IGNORE
THAT.
>> EVERY TIME WE CALLED AND
EVERY TIME WE TALKED TO THE
CORPS OF ENGINEERS WE SAID,
"THIS IS NOT CONSULTATION, AND
WE DON'T AGREE WITH THIS
PIPELINE. CAN WE TAKE A STEP
BACK AND START OVER?"
AND THE CORPS OF ENGINEERS SAYS,
"WELL, WE CALLED THEM, WE
EMAILED THEM, WE CALLED CHAIRMAN
ARCHAMBAULT'S OFFICE."
EVERY TIME WE DIDN'T AGREE WITH
WHAT THEY WERE DOING.
BUT THAT'S NOT HEARD.
SO WE DON'T GET LISTENED TO, WE
DON'T GET HEARD.
CHECK OFF THE BOX "WE TALKED TO
THE TRIBE."
>> Reporter: THE DAKOTA ACCESS
PIPELINE IS NOT THE FIRST
CONTROVERSIAL PIECE OF
INFRASTRUCTURE TO CROSS THIS
LAND.
IN THE MID-20TH CENTURY, THE
ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS CREATED
DAMS UP AND DOWN THE MISSOURI
RIVER AS PART OF A LARGE FLOOD
CONTROL AND HYDROPOWER PROJECT.
>> HERE IN THIS STATE, THERE IS
BEING BUILT THE LARGEST DAM OF
ITS KIND IN THE WORLD.
IT IS A SOURCE OF PLEASURE TO ME
AS PRESIDENT THEREFORE TO COME
HERE ON THIS OCCASION.
>> Reporter: VILLAGES WERE
FLOODED, INCLUDING AN AREA WHERE
MANY STANDING ROCK SIOUX HAD
MADE THEIR HOMES.
THIS DAM CREATED LAKE OAHE,
FLOODING OVER 50-THOUSAND ACRES
ON THE RESERVATION IN BOTH NORTH
DAKOTA AND SOUTH DAKOTA, DRIVING
FAMILIES OUT.
PRESIDENT OBAMA VISITED STANDING
ROCK IN 2014.
IT WAS HIS FIRST VISIT TO A
RESERVATION AS PRESIDENT.
AND IT WAS THE FIRST TIME ANY
SITTING US PRESIDENT HAD VISITED
THE RESERVATION.
>> TO BUILD MORE ECONOMIC
OPPORTUNITY IN INDIAN COUNTRY,
BECAUSE EVERY AMERICAN INCLUDING
EVERY NATIVE AMERICAN DESERVES A
CHANCE TO WORK HARD AND GET
AHEAD.
>> Reporter: FOLLOWING PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S 2014 VISIT, THE DAKOTA
ACCESS PIPELINE PROTESTS GREW
AND ENERGIZED THE STANDING ROCK
SIOUX.
AFTER THE ARMY CORPS ANNOUNCED
LAST JULY, THAT MOST OF THE
DAKOTA ACCESS PIPELINE ROUTE HAD
BEEN APPROVED, THE TRIBE FILED
SUIT IN FEDERAL COURT IN
WASHINGTON D.C. CLAIMING THE
CONSULTATION PROCESS WAS"
FUNDAMENTALLY FLAWED."
THE TRIBE ALSO ARGUED THE
PIPELINE'S IMPACT ON HISTORIC
PROPERTIES WAS NOT PROPERLY
CONSIDERED IN THE PERMITTING
PROCESS.
FEDERAL LAW REQUIRES THAT, EVEN
IF THE AFFECTED PROPERTY FALLS
OUTSIDE OF RESERVATION
BOUNDARIES.
THE ARMY CORPS DISPUTED THE
TRIBE'S CLAIM.
LAST SEPTEMBER, THE U.S.
DISTRICT JUDGE JAMES BOASBERG
RULED ON THE TRIBE'S REQUEST TO
HALT CONSTRUCTION.
THE STANDING ROCK SIOUX LOST,
BUT THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
STEPPED IN AND PUT THE PROJECT
ON HOLD.
>> I THINK IT'S UNPRECEDENTED IN
TERMS OF ENERGY DEVELOPMENT IN
THIS COUNTRY, THAT YOU'D
ACTUALLY HAVE THE GOVERNMENT'S
LAWYERS, JOIN IN A STATEMENT,
AFTER THEY LOST IN COURT THE
SAME DAY, THAT THEY'D GO OUT AND
SAY, "BY THE WAY WE'RE PAUSING
THIS PROJECT."
THEY DIDN'T CONVINCE THE JUDGE,
SO THEY DID SOMETHING ELSE.
>> THREE MONTHS LATER, AS FALL
TURNED TO WINTER, THE PROTESTS
CONTINUED TO GROW.
THEN THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
BLOCKED THE FINAL PERMIT NEEDED
TO BUILD UNDER THE RIVER.
>> THE CORPS OF ENGINEERS IS
GONNA DENY THE EASEMENT!"
>> Reporter: FOR THE PROTESTERS
AND THE TRIBE, IT FELT LIKE
VICTORY.
BUT IT WOULD BE SHORT-LIVED.
>> THIS IS WITH RESPECT TO THE
CONSTRUCTION OF THE DAKOTA
ACCESS PIPELINE.
>> Reporter: SEVEN WEEKS LATER,
ON HIS FIFTH DAY IN OFFICE,
PRESIDENT TRUMP ISSUED AN
EXECUTIVE MEMORANDUM INSTRUCTING
THE ARMY CORP OF ENGINEERS TO
EXPEDITE THE PERMITTING PROCESS.
JUST LAST WEEK, BY ORDER OF
NORTH DAKOTA'S GOVERNOR,
PROTESTERS LEFT THEIR CAMPS NEAR
THE PIPELINE SITE.
BEFORE GOING, SOME BURNED THEIR
TENTS AND OTHER STRUCTURES.
POLICE ARRESTED DOZENS OF
PROTESTERS THAT DEFIED THE ORDER
AND FORCIBLY REMOVED THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: TOMORROW, IN
WASHINGTON D.C. FEDERAL COURT,
JUDGES WILL HEAR ARGUMENTS FROM
ENERGY TRANSFER PARTNERS AND THE
STANDING ROCK SIOUX ON WHETHER
WORK ON THE PIPELINE SHOULD BE
COMPLETED OR BLOCKED DUE IT ITS
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT."
BEYOND STANDING ROCK" PREMIERES
ON PBS STATIONS THIS SPRING.
CHECK YOUR LOCAL LISTINGS.
>> Sreenivasan: IN HIS FIRST
ADDRESS TO CONGRESS THIS
TUESDAY, PRESIDENT TRUMP IS
LIKELY TO TALK ABOUT HIS VISION
FOR REBUILDING AMERICA'S
INFRASTRUCTURE.
HE'S PREVIOUSLY TOUTED A
TRILLION DOLLAR PRICE PLAN
WITHOUT DETAILING HOW HE MIGHT
PAY FOR IT.
ONE HURDLE?
THE FEDERAL GAS TAX, THE
NATION'S NUMBER ONE FUNDING
SOURCE FOR TRANSPORTATION
PROJECTS, HAS BEEN STUCK AT 18
CENTS A GALLON SINCE THE EARLY
1990S.
WITH AVERAGE GAS PRICES
REMAINING LOW AT $2.28 A GALLON,
MANY GOVERNORS, FROM NEW JERSEY
TO TENNESSEE TO MONTANA, ARE
RAISING OR CONSIDERING RAISING
STATE GAS TAXES TO JUMPSTART
ROAD, BRIDGE, AND TUNNEL
REPAIRS."
FINANCIAL TIMES" EDITOR ED
CROOKS JOINS ME NOW TO DISCUSS
THIS.
STATES, SOME OF THE STATES,
TENNESSEE, OKLAHOMA, ALASKA.
THESE WENT TRUMP FAIRLY
SIGNIFICANTLY AND THEY'RE
CONSIDERING AN INCREASE IN TAXES
WHICH IS USUALLY NOT VERY
FAVORABLE TO REPUBLICANS.
>> EXACTLY AND AS YOU SAY NEW
JERSEY WENT AND INCREASED THEIR
GAS TAX LAST YEAR.
IT SEEMS PEOPLE FEEL THERE IS A
REAL PROBLEM, AMERICAN
INFRASTRUCTURE IS CRUMBLING,
PEOPLE ARE REALLY WORRIED ABOUT
THE STATES OF ROADS AND BRIDGES
IN PARTICULAR AND THEY NEED TO
DO SOMETHING.
I GUESS YOU'VE GOT TO MAKE THE
CASE IF YOU HAVE TO TAX
SOMETHING, BETTER TO TAX FUELS,
PEOPLE THAT LIKE AND WANT TO
HAPPEN.
ONE OF THE THINGS ABOUT
TAXATION, PEOPLE SAY IF YOU TAX
SOMETHING YOU TAX LESS OF IT.
TAX FUEL CONSUMPTION AND HAVE
PEOPLE GET LET OF IT.
AND PEOPLE MAKE FAIR PROFITS.
>> Sreenivasan: WE HAD A STORY
ON THIS PROGRAM A FEW YEARS AGO,
IN SORT OF THE IRONY, WHEN YOU
INCREASE THE PRICE OF GAS,
PEOPLE THINK ABOUT MORE FUEL
EFFICIENT VEHICLES, HYBRID
VEHICLES, IF THEY PURCHASE
THOSE, THEY PURCHASE LESS GAS.
>> THAT IS ABSOLUTELY TRUE.
DON'T FORGET AT THE MOMENT, OIL
PRICE ARE FAIRLY LOW.
A FEW YEARS AGO, OIL PRICE HE
WERE $100 PER BARREL, AND NOW,
THEY ARE 50, 55 A BARREL.
THERE IS THAT OPPORTUNITY THERE
TO PROBABLY MAKE A BIT OF THAT
GAP IN HIGH TAXES.
AND OF COURSE ONE OF THE THINGS
LOWER GAS PRICE HE HAVE BEEN
DOING IS THEY HAVE BEEN
ENCOURAGING PEOPLE TO BUY BIGGER
VEHICLES, LESS FUEL EFFICIENT
VEHICLES SO ON.
HEADING ON A PATH TOWARDS HIGH
CONSUMPTION.
IF YOU PUT THE TAX UP A LITTLE
BIT, IT WON'T HAVE THE EFFECT TO
DETER PEOPLE FROM DRIVING.
IF YOU DON'T HAVE ANY OTHER
MEANS TO GET TO WORK THAN A
VEHICLE, IF YOU ARE POOR, YOU
ARE LIKELY TO SPEND A GREATER
PORTION OF YOUR INCOME WHEN YOU
SEE A FIXED PRICE GO UP.
>> THAT IS THE BIGGEST NUMBER 1
PROBLEM WITH RAISING THE GAS
TRAVEL IS THE DISTRIBUTION
IMPACT.
PROBABLY DOESN'T HIT PEOPLE
RIGHT AT THE BOTTOM, NOT SO MUCH
OF AN ISSUE FOR THEM BUT
CERTAINLY PEOPLE OF LOWER TO
MIDDLE INCOMES, MODIFIER AN
ISSUE TO THEM, THEY PAY MORE OF
THEIR INCOME IN GASOLINE THAN
OTHER PEOPLE DO, THAN RICHER
PEOPLE DO AND THEY WOULD BE AS
YOU SAY HIT HARDER BY AN
INCREASE IN GAS TAX, THAT IS A
HARD THING TO OFFSET, THERE IS
NO PROBABLY OBVIOUS WAY TO MAKE
IT UP TO PEOPLE.
THERE ARE OTHER ISSUES, IF YOU
LIVE IN TOWN YOU MAY HAVE A MASS
TRANSIT OPTION, BUSES TRAINS OR
OTHER ISSUES, BUT IN THE COUNTRY
YOU HAVE TO HAVE YOUR CAR IF YOU
HAVE TO GET TO WORK TO THE SHOPS
WHATEVER, THAT IS POTENTIALLY A
BIG ISSUE FOR RAISING THE GAS
TAX.
>> Sreenivasan: FINANCIAL
TIMES EDITOR ED CROOKS THANKS
FOR JOINING US.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: THE MAYOR OF NEW
ORLEANS SAYS A DRUNK DRIVER WAS
RESPONSIBLE FOR LAST NIGHT'S
CRASH INTO SPECTATORS WATCHING A
MARDI GRAS PARADE.
POLICE SAY AT LEAST 28 PEOPLE
WERE INJURED, FIVE CRITICALLY,
WHEN A 25-YEAR-OLD MAN STRUCK
THREE VEHICLES AND PLOWED HIS
PICKUP TRUCK INTO THE CROWD.
THE DRIVER WAS UNHURT, BUT
JAILED AND CHARGED IMMEDIATELY
AFTER THE ACCIDENT.
THE FATHER OF THE NAVY SEAL
KILLED IN AN ATTACK ON AN AL
QAEDA COMPOUND IN YEMEN IS
CALLING FOR AN INVESTIGATION
INTO LAST MONTH'S MILITARY
ACTION.
IN HIS FIRST INTERVIEW SINCE HIS
SON, RYAN, WAS KILLED, BILL
OWENS TOLD THE "MIAMI HERALD" HE
QUESTIONS WHY PRESIDENT TRUMP
ORDERED THE GROUND RAID DURING
HIS FIRST WEEK IN OFFICE, WHEN
PRIOR ATTACKS HAD BEEN LIMITED
TO DRONES AND MISSILES.
RYAN OWENS, A 36-YEAR-OLD
MARRIED FATHER OF THREE, WAS THE
ONLY AMERICAN FATALITY IN THE
RAID, WHICH ALSO KILLED 30
YEMENIS, HALF OF WHOM WERE
CIVILIANS.
A WHITE HOUSE SPOKESPERSON WAS
ASKED ABOUT IT THIS MORNING ON
ABC.
>> DOES THE PRESIDENT WANT AN
INVESTIGATION?
>> I HAVEN'T HAD THE CHANCE TO
SPEAK WITH HIM DIRECTLY ABOUT
THAT, BUT I WOULD IMAGINE THAT
HE WOULD BE SUPPORTIVE OF THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: POPE FRANCIS
TODAY BECAME THE FIRST ROMAN
CATHOLIC PONTIFF TO VISIT THE
ANGLICAN PARISH IN ROME, PRAYING
WITH THE ANGLICAN BISHOP AND
CALLING FOR GREATER CLOSENESS
BETWEEN THE TWO CHURCHES.
THE CHURCHES SPLIT ALMOST 500
YEARS AGO, WHEN KING HENRY THE
EIGHTH FOUNDED THE CHURCH OF
ENGLAND.
DURING HIS VISIT, FRANCIS SAID
HE AND THE HEAD OF THE ANGLICAN
CHURCH PLAN TO VISIT SOUTH SUDAN
TOGETHER TO FOCUS ATTENTION ON A
COUNTRY PLAGUED BY FAMINE AND
CIVIL WAR.
AS HOLLYWOOD PREPARES FOR
TONIGHT'S ACADEMY AWARDS,
VETERAN FILM ACTOR BILL PAXTON
HAS DIED FOLLOWING COMPLICATIONS
FROM SURGERY FOR AN UNDISCLOSED
AILMENT.
PAXTON APPEARED IN SUCH
BLOCKBUSTERS AS "ALIENS,"
"TITANIC," "TWISTER," AND"
APOLLO 13," AND STARRED IN THE
HIT HBO SERIES, "BIG LOVE."
HE WAS CURRENTLY STARRING IN THE
CBS TELEVISION SERIES "TRAINING
DAY."
BILL PAXTON WAS 61.
AND A REMINDER THAT YOU CAN
FOLLOW COVERAGE OF THE ACADEMY
AWARDS TONIGHT ONLINE AT
PBS.ORG/NewsHOUR.
TOMORROW ON THE NewsHOUR, THE
LATEST ON THE TRUMP WHITE HOUSE
AND THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY'S NEW
LEADER.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.